Revisited Readme-sycl (#1)
OuadiElfarouki/llama.cpp: README-sycl.md

## Background

**SYCL** is a high-level parallel programming model designed to improve developers productivity writing code across various hardware accelerators such as CPUs, GPUs, and FPGAs. It is a single-source language designed for heterogeneous computing and based on standard C++17.

**oneAPI** is an open ecosystem and a standard-based specification, supporting multiple architectures including but not limited to intel CPUs, GPUs and FPGAs. The key components of the oneAPI ecosystem include : 

> - **DPCPP** *(Data Parallel C++)* : The primary oneAPI SYCL implementation, which includes the icpx/icx Compilers.
> - **oneAPI Libraries** : A set of highly optimized libraries targeting multiple domains *(e.g. oneMKL - Math Kernel Library)*.
> - **oneAPI LevelZero** : A high performance low level interface for fine-grained control over intel iGPUs and dGPUs.
> - **Nvidia & AMD Plugins** : These are plugins extending oneAPI's DPCPP support to SYCL on Nvidia and AMD GPU targets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DPCPP** *(Data Parallel C++)*: The primary oneAPI SYCL implementation, which includes the icpx/icx Compilers.
- **oneAPI Libraries**: A set of highly optimized libraries targeting multiple domains *(e.g. oneMKL - Math Kernel Library)*.
- **oneAPI LevelZero**: A high performance low level interface for fine-grained control over intel iGPUs and dGPUs.
- **Nvidia & AMD Plugins**: These are plugins extending oneAPI's DPCPP support to SYCL on Nvidia and AMD GPU targets. 
```

### Llama.cpp + SYCL 

> To avoid re-inventing the wheel, this SYCL "backend" follows the same design found in other llama.cpp BLAS-based paths such as * OpenBLAS, cuBLAS, CLBlast etc..*. The oneAPI's [SYCLomatic](https://github.com/oneapi-src/SYCLomatic) open-source migration tool (Commercial release [Intel® DPC++ Compatibility Tool](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/dpc-compatibility-tool.html)) was used for this purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This SYCL "backend" follows the same design found in other llama.cpp BLAS-based paths such as * OpenBLAS, cuBLAS, CLBlast etc..*. The oneAPI's [SYCLomatic](https://github.com/oneapi-src/SYCLomatic) open-source migration tool (Commercial release [Intel® DPC++ Compatibility Tool](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/dpc-compatibility-tool.html)) was used for this purpose.
```
Personal NIT. I think turns of phrase do not really help provide clarity, just make sentences longer and obscure the point of the sentence.

> The llama.cpp for SYCL is used to support: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The llama.cpp SYCL backend supports: 
```

Reviewer: Not sure about the for.

Reviewer 2: I agree that the "for" should be removed.

- Intel GPUs.
- Nvidia GPUs.

*Upcoming support : AMD GPUs*.

> For **Intel CPUs**, it is recommend to use llama.cpp for [x86](README.md#intel-onemkl) approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **Intel CPUs**, it is recommended to the use llama.cpp for [x86](README.md#intel-onemkl) approach.
```
Not sure about the "for X approach" either. It seems that backends are referred as "Builds", so maybe "Blas Intel oneMKL" build should be the term used. It's a bit of a nit though, same as above.

Author: Agree, I'll update that. The "for X" is not used a standard term to refer to the backend/build.

> For **Intel CPUs**, it is recommend to use llama.cpp for [x86](README.md#intel-onemkl) approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When targetting **Intel CPUs**, it is recommended to use the llama.cpp for [x86](README.md#intel-onemkl) approach.
```
I agree with @Alcpz I propose changing "for" with "When targetting"

|Windows|Support|Windows 11|

## Supported devices

> ### intel GPUs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Intel GPUs
```

> The BLAS acceleration oneAPI Math Kernel Library which comes with the oneAPI base-toolkit natively supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible" while building/running llama.cpp, simply run the following : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The BLAS acceleration oneAPI Math Kernel Library which comes with the oneAPI base-toolkit natively supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible" while building/running llama.cpp, simply run the following: 
```

> The BLAS acceleration oneAPI Math Kernel Library which comes with the oneAPI base-toolkit natively supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible" while building/running llama.cpp, simply run the following : 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The oneAPI Math Kernel Library, which the oneAPI base-toolkit includes, supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible", simply run the following : 
```
Bad sentence. Too long and unwieldy for a simple point

|Intel built-in Arc GPU| Support| built-in Arc GPU in Meteor Lake|
|Intel iGPU| Support| iGPU in i5-1250P, i7-1260P, i7-1165G7|

*Notes :*

- Device memory can be a limitation when running a large model on an intel GPU. The loaded model size, *`llm_load_tensors : buffer_size`*, is displayed in the log when running `./bin/main`

- Please make sure the GPU shared memory from the host is large enough to account for the model's size. For e.g. the *llama-2-7b.Q4_0* requires at least 8.0GB for integrated GPUs and 4.0GB for discrete GPUs.

- If the iGPU has less than 80  EUs *(Execution Unit)*, the inference speed will likely be too slow for practical use.

### Nvidia GPUs
The BLAS acceleration on Nvidia GPUs through oneAPI can be obtained using the Nvidia plugins for oneAPI and the cuBLAS backend of the upstream oneMKL library. Details and instructions on how to setup the runtime and library can be found in [this section](#i-setup-environment)

> Math Kernel Library which comes with the oneAPI base-toolkit natively supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible" while building/running llama.cpp, simply run the following :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Math Kernel Library which comes with the oneAPI base-toolkit natively supports intel GPUs. In order to make it "visible" while building/running llama.cpp, simply run the following:
```

Reviewer 2: Why do we have this sentence in the "Nvidia GPU" section? The base toolkit oneMKL does not support Nvidia GPUs, and this sentence is discussing Intel GPUs not Nvidia.  I would recommend removing it.

Author: Yes indeed @AidanBeltonS that was a "leftover" from previous changes. I'll remove it.

- **Tested devices**

|Nvidia GPU| Status | Verified Model|
|-|-|-|
|Ampere Series| Support| A100, A4000|
|Ampere Series *(Mobile)*| Support| RTX 40 Series

*Notes :* 
  - Support for Nvidia targets through oneAPI is currently limited to Linux platforms.

  - Please make sure the native oneAPI MKL *(dedicated to intel CPUs and GPUs)* is not "visible" at this stage to properly setup and use the built-from-source oneMKL with cuBLAS backend in llama.cpp for Nvidia GPUs. 

## Docker
The docker build option is currently limited to *intel GPU* targets.
### Build image 
```sh
docker build -t llama-cpp-sycl --build-arg="LLAMA_SYCL_F16=[OFF|ON]" -f .devops/main-intel.Dockerfile .
```

*Note* : you can also use the `.devops/server-intel.Dockerfile`, which builds the *"server"* alternative.

### Run container

```sh
# First, find all the DRI cards
ls -la /dev/dri
# Then, pick the card that you want to use (here for e.g. /dev/dri/card1).
docker run -it --rm -v "$(pwd):/app:Z" --device /dev/dri/renderD128:/dev/dri/renderD128 --device /dev/dri/card1:/dev/dri/card1 llama-cpp-sycl -m "/app/models/YOUR_MODEL_FILE" -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 400 -e -ngl 33
```

> *Notes :*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Notes:*
```

> - Docker have been tested succefully on native Linux. WSL support has not been verified yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Docker has been tested successfully on native Linux. WSL support has not been verified yet.
```

- You may need to install Intel GPU driver on the **host** machine *(Please refer to the [Linux configuration](#linux) for details)*.

## Linux

### I. Setup Environment

1. **Install GPU drivers**

  - **Intel GPU** 

> Intel data center GPUs drivers installation guide and download page can be found here : [Get intel dGPU Drivers](https://dgpu-docs.intel.com/driver/installation.html#ubuntu-install-steps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intel data center GPUs drivers installation guide and download page can be found here: [Get intel dGPU Drivers](https://dgpu-docs.intel.com/driver/installation.html#ubuntu-install-steps).
```

*Note* : for client GPUs *(iGPU & Arc A-Series)*, please refer to the [client iGPU driver installation](https://dgpu-docs.intel.com/driver/client/overview.html).

> Once installed, please add user(s) to group: `video`, `render`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once installed, add the user(s) to the `video` and `render` groups.
```

```sh
sudo usermod -aG render <username>
sudo usermod -aG video <username>
```

> *Note* : logout/re-login for the changes to take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: logout/re-login for the changes to take effect.
```

Verify installation through `clinfo`:

```sh
sudo apt install clinfo
sudo clinfo -l
```

Sample output:

```sh
Platform #0: Intel(R) OpenCL Graphics
 `-- Device #0: Intel(R) Arc(TM) A770 Graphics

Platform #0: Intel(R) OpenCL HD Graphics
 `-- Device #0: Intel(R) Iris(R) Xe Graphics [0x9a49]
```

- **Nvidia GPU**

In order to target Nvidia GPUs through SYCL, please make sure the CUDA/CUBLAS native requirements *-found [here](README.md#cublas)-* are installed.

> Installation can be verified by running the following :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installation can be verified by running the following:
```

```sh
nvidia-smi
```

> Please make sure at least one CUDA device is available, which can be displayed like this *(here an A100-40GB Nvidia GPU)* : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please make sure at least one CUDA device is available, which can be displayed like this *(here an A100-40GB Nvidia GPU)*: 
```

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| NVIDIA-SMI 535.54.03              Driver Version: 535.54.03    CUDA Version: 12.2     |
|-----------------------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| GPU  Name                 Persistence-M | Bus-Id        Disp.A | Volatile Uncorr. ECC |
| Fan  Temp   Perf          Pwr:Usage/Cap |         Memory-Usage | GPU-Util  Compute M. |
|                                         |                      |               MIG M. |
|=========================================+======================+======================|
|   0  NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB          On  | 00000000:8D:00.0 Off |                    0 |
| N/A   36C    P0              57W / 250W |      4MiB / 40960MiB |      0%      Default |
|                                         |                      |             Disabled |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
```

2. **Install Intel® oneAPI Base toolkit**

- **Base installation**

> The base toolkit can be obtained from the official [Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit ](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit.html) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base toolkit can be obtained from the official [Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit.html) page.
```

Please follow the instructions for downloading and installing the Toolkit for Linux, and preferably keep the default installation values unchanged, notably the installation path *(`/opt/intel/oneapi` by default)*.

Following guidelines/code snippets assume the default installation values. Otherwise, please make sure the necessary changes are reflected where applicable.  

Upon a successful installation, SYCL is enabled for the available intel devices, along with relevant libraries such as oneAPI MKL for intel GPUs.

> - **Bringing support to Nvidia GPUs**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Adding support to Nvidia GPUs**
```
Bringing is an odd word

> **oneAPI** : In order to enable SYCL support on Nvidia GPUs through oneAPI, please install the [Codeplay oneAPI Plugin for Nvidia GPUs](https://developer.codeplay.com/products/oneapi/nvidia/download). User should also make sure the plugin version matches the installed base toolkit one *(previous step)* for a seamless "oneAPI on Nvidia GPU" setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**oneAPI** : In order to enable SYCL support on Nvidia GPUs, please install the [Codeplay oneAPI Plugin for Nvidia GPUs](https://developer.codeplay.com/products/oneapi/nvidia/download). User should also make sure the plugin version matches the installed base toolkit one *(previous step)* for a seamless "oneAPI on Nvidia GPU" setup.
```
We know you are talking about oneAPI due to the lines prefix, no need to have a longer sentence

> **oneMKL** : The current oneMKL releases *(shipped with the oneAPI base-toolkit)* does not contain the cuBLAS backend. A build from source of the upstream [oneMKL](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneMKL) with the *cuBLAS* backend enabled is thus required to run it on Nvidia GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**oneMKL** : The current oneMKL releases *(shipped with the oneAPI base-toolkit)* do not contain the cuBLAS backend. A build from source of the upstream [oneMKL](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneMKL) with the *cuBLAS* backend enabled is thus required to run it on Nvidia GPUs.
```

    max compute_units 24,	max work group size 8192,	max sub group size 64,	global mem size 67065057280
  Device 3: Intel(R) Arc(TM) A770 Graphics,	compute capability 3.0,
    max compute_units 512,	max work group size 1024,	max sub group size 32,	global mem size 16225243136
```

|Attribute|Note|
|-|-|
|compute capability 1.3|Level-zero driver/runtime, recommended |
|compute capability 3.0|OpenCL driver/runtime, slower than level-zero in most cases|

4. Launch inference

For instance, in order to target the SYCL device with *ID*=0 *(log from previous command)*, we simply specify `GGML_SYCL_DEVICE=0`.

```sh
GGML_SYCL_DEVICE=0 ./build/bin/main -m models/llama-2-7b.Q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 400 -e -ngl 33
```

Otherwise, you can run the script :

```sh
./examples/sycl/run_llama2.sh
```

*Notes :*

> - By default, `mmap` is used to read model file. In some cases, it causes runtime hang issues. Please disable it by passing `--no-mmap` to the `/bin/main` if faced with the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By default, `mmap` is used to read the model file. In some cases, it causes runtime hang issues. Please disable it by passing `--no-mmap` to the `/bin/main` if faced with the issue.
```

## Windows

### I. Setup Environment

1. Install GPU driver

Intel GPU drivers instructions guide and download page can be found here : [Get intel GPU Drivers](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/docs/discrete-gpus/arc/software/drivers.html).

2. Install Visual Studio

> If you already have a recent version of Microsoft Visual Studio, you can skip this tep. Otherwise, please refer to the official download page for [Microsoft Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have a recent version of Microsoft Visual Studio, you can skip this step. Otherwise, please refer to the official download page for [Microsoft Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/).
```

3. Install Intel® oneAPI Base toolkit

> The base toolkit can be obtained from the official [Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit ](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit.html) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base toolkit can be obtained from the official [Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit.html) page.
```

Please follow the instructions for downloading and installing the Toolkit for Windows, and preferably keep the default installation values unchanged, notably the installation path *(`C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI` by default)*.

Following guidelines/code snippets assume the default installation values. Otherwise, please make sure the necessary changes are reflected where applicable.  

b. Enable oneAPI running environment:

- Type "oneAPI" in the search bar, then open the `Intel oneAPI command prompt for Intel 64 for Visual Studio 2022` App.

> - On the command prompt, enable the runtime environment with the following :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the command prompt, enable the runtime environment with the following:
```

```
"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" intel64
```

c. Verify installation

> In the oneAPI command line, run the following to print the available SYCL devices : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the oneAPI command line, run the following to print the available SYCL devices: 
```

```
sycl-ls
```

> There should be one or more *level-zero* GPU devices displayed as **[ext_oneapi_level_zero:gpu]**. Below is example of such output detecting an *intel Iris Xe* GPU as a Level-zero SYCL device : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There should be one or more *level-zero* GPU devices displayed as **[ext_oneapi_level_zero:gpu]**. Below is example of such output detecting an *intel Iris Xe* GPU as a Level-zero SYCL device: 
```

- Extract `w64devkit` on your pc.

- Add the **bin** folder path in the Windows system PATH environment (for e.g. `C:\xxx\w64devkit\bin\`).

### II. Build llama.cpp

> On the oneAPI command line window, step into the llama.cpp main directory and run the following :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the oneAPI command line window, step into the llama.cpp main directory and run the following:
```

```
mkdir -p build
cd build
@call "C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" intel64 --force

cmake -G "MinGW Makefiles" ..  -DLLAMA_SYCL=ON -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=icx -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=icx  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DLLAMA_SYCL_F16=ON

make
```

Otherwise, run the `win-build-sycl.bat` wrapper which encapsulates the former instructions : 
```sh
.\examples\sycl\win-build-sycl.bat
```

*Notes :*

- By default, calling `make` will build all target binary files. In case of a minimal experimental setup, the user can build the inference executable only through `make main`.

### III. Run the inference

1. Retrieve and prepare model

You can refer to the general [*Prepare and Quantize*](README#prepare-and-quantize) guide for model prepration, or simply download [llama-2-7b.Q4_0.gguf](https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Llama-2-7B-GGUF/blob/main/llama-2-7b.Q4_0.gguf) model as example.

2. Enable oneAPI running environment

> On the oneAPI command line window, run the following and step into the llama.cpp directory : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the oneAPI command line window, run the following and step into the llama.cpp directory: 
```

```
"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" intel64
```

3. List devices information

> Similar to the native `sycl-ls`, available SYCL devices can be queried as follow :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the native `sycl-ls`, available SYCL devices can be queried as follow:
```

```
build\bin\ls-sycl-device.exe
```

> The output of this command in a system with 1 *intel CPU* and 1 *intel GPU* would look like the following :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of this command in a system with 1 *intel CPU* and 1 *intel GPU* would look like the following:
```

    max compute_units 24,	max work group size 8192,	max sub group size 64,	global mem size 67065057280
  Device 3: Intel(R) Arc(TM) A770 Graphics,	compute capability 3.0,
    max compute_units 512,	max work group size 1024,	max sub group size 32,	global mem size 16225243136
```

|Attribute|Note|
|-|-|
|compute capability 1.3|Level-zero running time, recommended |
|compute capability 3.0|OpenCL running time, slower than level-zero in most cases|

4. Launch inference

> Set device ID=0 with `set GGML_SYCL_DEVICE=0` to target the Level-zero intel GPU and run the main :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set device ID=0 with `set GGML_SYCL_DEVICE=0` to target the Level-zero intel GPU and run the main:
```

```
set GGML_SYCL_DEVICE=0
build\bin\main.exe -m models\llama-2-7b.Q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:\nStep 1:" -n 400 -e -ngl 33 -s 0
```
Otherwise, run the following wrapper script:

```
.\examples\sycl\win-run-llama2.bat
```

Note:

> - By default, `mmap` is used to read model file. In some cases, it causes runtime hang issues. Please disable it by passing `--no-mmap` to the `main.exe` if faced with the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By default, `mmap` is used to read the model file. In some cases, it causes runtime hang issues. Please disable it by passing `--no-mmap` to the `main.exe` if faced with the issue.
```

|LLAMA_SYCL_TARGET | INTEL *(default)* \| NVIDIA|Set the SYCL target device type.|
|LLAMA_SYCL_F16|OFF *(default)* \|ON *(optional)*|Enable FP16 build with SYCL code path.|
|CMAKE_C_COMPILER|icx|Set *icx* compiler for SYCL code path.|
|CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER|icpx *(Linux)*, icx *(Windows)*|Set `icpx/icx` compiler for SYCL code path.|

#### Runtime

|Name|Value|Function|
|-|-|-|
|GGML_SYCL_DEVICE|0 (default) or 1|Set the device id used. Check the device ids by default running output|
|GGML_SYCL_DEBUG|0 (default) or 1|Enable log function by macro: GGML_SYCL_DEBUG|
|ZES_ENABLE_SYSMAN| 0 (default) or 1|Support to get free memory of GPU by sycl::aspect::ext_intel_free_memory.<br>Recommended to use when --split-mode = layer|

## Known Issues

- Hanging during startup

  llama.cpp uses *mmap* as the default mode for reading the model file and copying it to the GPU. In some systems, `memcpy` might behave abnormally and therefore hang.

  - **Solution** : add `--no-mmap` or `--mmap 0` flag to the `main` executable.

- `Split-mode:[row]` is not supported.

## Q&A

- Error:  `error while loading shared libraries: libsycl.so.7: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory`.

>   - Potential cause : Unavailable oneAPI installation or invisible ENV variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Potential cause : Unavailable oneAPI installation or unset ENV variables.
```
Not really sure about this one.

Author: I'll use "Not set" for this one.

  - Solution : Install *oneAPI base toolkit* and enable its ENV through: `source /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`.

> - General compiler error : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- General compiler error: 
```

  - Remove build folder or try a clean-build.

- I can **not** see `[ext_oneapi_level_zero:gpu]` afer installing the GPU driver on Linux.

  Please double-check with `sudo sycl-ls`.

>   If it's present in the list, please add video/render group to your user then **logout/login** or restart your system :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If it's present in the list, please add video/render group to your user then **logout/login** or restart your system:
```
